TUTORIAL4/demo.md, before:

# Tutorial 4 Demonstration

In this demonstration we will attempt to calculate receiver functions for station
[7D.FN07A](https://ds.iris.edu/gmap/#network=7D&station=FN07A&planet=earth) from the Cascadia Initiative.


First, ensure the `Conda` environment is activated:

```
conda activate obsw25
```

### Creating and editing the StDb database

Simply type in the terminal:

```
query_fdsn_stdb -N 7D -S FN07A FN07A > logfile
```

As we already determined the station orientation using OrientPy, we need to edit the station file using one of the `StDb` scripts:

```
edit_stdb FN07A.pkl
```

This will open a GUI where you can manually edit any field. *Do not change important metadata information!* However, you can edit the second to last field, with corresponds to `azcorr` and stores the orientation of the H1 component. You can check that the database has been updated:

```
ls_stdb FN07A.pkl
```

### Calculating receiver functions

The script to calculate receiver functions is called `rfpy_calc`. By default, this script processes data for all teleseismic P-waves from earthquakes with magnitudes between 6 and 9 and with epicentral distances between 30 and 90 degrees that occurred during the station deployment time. The default component alignment is ZRT and the default deconvolution method is the wiener filter. This is almost what is needed to reproduce the results in Audet (2016) - we only need to change the minimum magnitude to 5.8: 

```
rfpy_calc --minmag=5.8 FN07A.pkl
```

Note that we could use a different deconvolution method (e.g., `method=multitaper`), select a shorter time range for the analysis, or align the waveforms along a different coordinate system (e.g., `LQT`, `PVH`). However, for OBS data, we prefer to use the `ZRT` alignment to avoid artifacts produced by shallow low-velocity sediments, and the Wiener deconvolution method.

After running `rfpy_calc`, you should have a new folder named P_DATA/7D.FN07A containing all event folders, each of them containing the meta data, station data, raw data, and receiver function data:

```
ls -R * | head
```

Once this step is done, you can still re-calculate the receiver functions using different processing options (see below). If you want to change those parameters, run the previous command with -O to override anything that exists on disk. However, some parameters cannot be changed easily without re-downloading the raw data (e.g., length of processing window, sampling rate). 

Note that you can get more data by either specifying a new phase to analyze (e.g., `--phase=PP`), going to lower magnitudes (e.g., `--minmag=5. --maxmag=5.8`), by running the same command with those additional arguments.

### Re-calculating with different options

If later on you decide you want to try a different deconvolution method, component alignment or maybe try some pre-filtering options, you can always simply use the rfpy_recalc script to do so.

> Note: Re-calculating the receiver functions for different options will override any existing receiver function data. Be mindful of this when using this script.

This can be done by typing in the terminal:

```
rfpy_recalc --align=ZRT --method=multitaper FN07A.pkl
```

### Plotting receiver functions

Now that we have our data set of receiver functions, we can plot it! There are two types of plots: the "Back-azimuth" panels and the "Slowness" panels. In the first case the receiver functions are sorted by back-azimuth and all slowness information is lost (i.e., averaged out). In the other case it is the opposite and the receiver fuuntions are sorted by slowness and all back-azimuth information is lost. When plotting, you can decide whether to include all data, or set some quality control thresholds based on 1) the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) calculated on the vertical component, 2) the correlation coefficient (CC) value of predicted and observed radial components, and 3) outliers. If you don’t specify any thresholding, by default the script `rfpy_plot` will use all data to make the plots. You also want to set corner frequencies for filterig, otherwise it will be difficult to see anything. Typically you would choose a bandwidth that encompasses the dominant frequencies of teleseismic P waves (i.e., 0.05 to 1 Hz). Let’s examine the two types of plots with examples:

#### Back-azimuth panel

Below we make a plot of all P receiver functions, filtered between 0.1 and 0.5 Hz, using 36 back-azimuth bins. We select RFs for which the raw waveform SNR is greater than 8 dB measured on the vertical component. We plot the RFs from -2. to +20 seconds following the zero-lag (i.e., P-wave arrival) time, stack all traces to produce an averaged RF, and normalize all traces to that of the stacks.

```
rfpy_plot --snr=8 --bp=0.1,0.5 --nbaz=36 --normalize --trange=-2.,20. FN07A.pkl
```

This reproduces Figure 10b in Audet (2016). 

#### Slowness panel

Now let’s make a plot of all P receiver functions, this time sorted by slowness using 20 bins. Instead

```
rfpy_plot --snr=8 --bp=0.1,0.5 --nslow=20 --normalize --trange=-2.,20. FN07A.pkl
```

Commit message:

Demo processing now matches Audet (2016) - also fixed rfpy_plot; needed re-install

TUTORIAL4/demo.md, after:

# Tutorial 4 Demonstration

In this demonstration we will attempt to calculate receiver functions for station
[7D.FN07A](https://ds.iris.edu/gmap/#network=7D&station=FN07A&planet=earth) from the Cascadia Initiative.


First, ensure the `Conda` environment is activated:

```
conda activate obsw25
```

### Creating and editing the StDb database

Simply type in the terminal:

```
query_fdsn_stdb -N 7D -S FN07A FN07A > logfile
```

As we already determined the station orientation using OrientPy, we need to edit the station file using one of the `StDb` scripts:

```
edit_stdb FN07A.pkl
```

This will open a GUI where you can manually edit any field. *Do not change important metadata information!* However, you can edit the second to last field, with corresponds to `azcorr` and stores the orientation of the H1 component. You can check that the database has been updated:

```
ls_stdb FN07A.pkl
```

### Calculating receiver functions

The script to calculate receiver functions is called `rfpy_calc`. By default, this script processes data for all teleseismic P-waves from earthquakes with magnitudes between 6 and 9 and with epicentral distances between 30 and 90 degrees that occurred during the station deployment time. The default component alignment is ZRT and the default deconvolution method is the wiener filter. This is almost what is needed to reproduce the results in Audet (2016) - we only need to change the minimum magnitude to 5.8: 

```
rfpy_calc --minmag=5.8 FN07A.pkl
```

Note that we could use a different deconvolution method (e.g., `method=multitaper`), select a shorter time range for the analysis, or align the waveforms along a different coordinate system (e.g., `LQT`, `PVH`). However, for OBS data, we prefer to use the `ZRT` alignment to avoid artifacts produced by shallow low-velocity sediments, and the Wiener deconvolution method.

After running `rfpy_calc`, you should have a new folder named P_DATA/7D.FN07A containing all event folders, each of them containing the meta data, station data, raw data, and receiver function data:

```
ls -R * | head
```

Once this step is done, you can still re-calculate the receiver functions using different processing options (see below). If you want to change those parameters, run the previous command with -O to override anything that exists on disk. However, some parameters cannot be changed easily without re-downloading the raw data (e.g., length of processing window, sampling rate). 

Note that you can get more data by either specifying a new phase to analyze (e.g., `--phase=PP`), going to lower magnitudes (e.g., `--minmag=5. --maxmag=5.8`), by running the same command with those additional arguments.

### Re-calculating with different options

If later on you decide you want to try a different deconvolution method, component alignment or maybe try some pre-filtering options, you can always simply use the rfpy_recalc script to do so.

> Note: Re-calculating the receiver functions for different options will override any existing receiver function data. Be mindful of this when using this script.

This can be done by typing in the terminal:

```
rfpy_recalc --align=ZRT --method=multitaper FN07A.pkl
```

### Plotting receiver functions

Now that we have our data set of receiver functions, we can plot it! There are two types of plots: the "Back-azimuth" panels and the "Slowness" panels. In the first case the receiver functions are sorted by back-azimuth and all slowness information is lost (i.e., averaged out). In the other case it is the opposite and the receiver fuuntions are sorted by slowness and all back-azimuth information is lost. When plotting, you can decide whether to include all data, or set some quality control thresholds based on 1) the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) calculated on the vertical component, 2) the correlation coefficient (CC) value of predicted and observed radial components, and 3) outliers. If you don’t specify any thresholding, by default the script `rfpy_plot` will use all data to make the plots. You also want to set corner frequencies for filterig, otherwise it will be difficult to see anything. Typically you would choose a bandwidth that encompasses the dominant frequencies of teleseismic P waves (i.e., 0.05 to 1 Hz). Let’s examine the two types of plots with examples:

#### Back-azimuth panel

Below we make a plot of all P receiver functions, filtered between 0.1 and 0.5 Hz, using 72 back-azimuth bins. We select RFs for which the raw waveform SNR is greater than 8 dB measured on the vertical component. We plot the RFs from 0. to +20 seconds following the zero-lag (i.e., P-wave arrival) time, stack all traces to produce an averaged RF, and normalize all traces to that of the stacks.

```
rfpy_plot --snr=5 --bp=0.1,0.5 --nbaz=72 --normalize --stacked --trange=0.,20. FN07A.pkl
```

This approximately reproduces Figure 10b in Audet (2016). Small details may differ due to the use of different window lengths and pre-processing, etc.

#### Slowness panel

Now let’s make a plot of all P receiver functions, this time sorted by slowness using 40 bins. 

```
rfpy_plot --snr=5 --bp=0.1,0.5 --nslow=40 --normalize --stacked --trange=0.,20. FN07A.pkl
```
